Tutorials.

Navigation tutorial.

Camera control.
Throttle control.
Course control.
Small waypoint excercise.

Needs text hints and color blink of controls.
Needs navigational triggers on the backend.
Needs listable text box with pages.


Active sonar and TMA tutorial.

Detect, mark, enter solution.
Chase and keep in low range for a minute.
Multiwindow feature tutorial.
Reveal true solution in the end.

Needs dynamic shape hints on TMA controls.
Needs solution hint from server.
? Needs button input from client to reveal the solution.
? Needs client to send success or failure result for tutorial scenario.


Artillery tutorial.

Reloading.
Aiming.
Search patterns.
Detect using active sonar and kill a test target.

Needs dynamic color hints on aiming controls.
Needs death triggers on the server.
Needs victory condition as death.


Passive sonar and towed arrays.

Detect, mark, enter solution and kill a target.

Needs same features as active sonar tutorial.



Campaign starts with routine ecological tasks and anti-smuggling patrols.
cool things:
* dangerous area that must be left periodacally
* swift currents.
* leviathan


Mission 1.

Smuggler patrol.

* Whale health inspection. Approach 3 whales.
* One of the whales is terminally sick (meteorism) and needs to be killed by torpedo. Other whales must stay alive.
* Smuggler search and traffic inspection. Music-based identification. Techno for smuggler,
    country/blues/instrumental for normal traders.
* Ping as a warning shot.
* Smuggler starts running away. Chase and kill after authorization.
* Inspect the husk by staying close to it for 30 seconds.


Mission 2.

SoS signal investigation.

There is a tanker missing in the area. It went off the charts
and an acoustic SoS signal appeared.
* Find and approach the signal.
* Give marines time to investigate (60 seconds). -> It is a pirate attack.
* Alarm, torpedo inbound. Inform the player that he needs to dodge on flank.
* Seek and destroy the target: lone pirate.
* Investigate pirate husk: it turns out to be an attack submarine of the nation that we are
on the brink of war with.

Enemies: 1 shitty Kilo.


Mission 3.

Militarization, advanced training recommendations.
Retaliation. While diplomats argue, you are tasked with a symmetric response.
You must remain anonymous.

* Approach trade route.
* Designate enemy traders by their transmitter morse signal.
* No frindly traders must die.
* Kill one enemy trader.
* You are authorized to kill enemy patrols.
* Escape to the designated area alive.

Enemies: 2-3 shitty Kilo.


Mission 4.

War has been declared. New submarine (Stork) allowed.
Convoy attack. Economical harassment.

* Look for the Convoy.
* Destroy at least 6 commercial ships.
* Escape to the designated area alive.

Enemies: 2-3 shitty Kilo, 1 medium November.


Mission 5.

Twin pack scirmish. Force through the front line and kill the
early-detection submarine search station. Extract to the designated area alive.

Allies: 1 Stork.
Enemies: 5-6 shitty kilos, pair of Novembers near the target.
Allied stork must not be killed by you.