schell_j_the_art_of_game_design_a_book_of_lenses.pdf



1). High-level focus can be defined in experiences, that you want to convey.

Examples for Dsubs:

    - experience of being hunted by half-blind enemy.

        Hide and seek emotions, when fast and powerful but unperceptive enemy is running around looking for prey and you have to hide or go perfectly silent/still in order to evade it. Much improved by fear of being found and loosing something presious. Is stronger when you've made some progress and need to return somewhere. Should not be overused and become routime. Couple of rare encounters, where you are warned that the enemy is overwhelming. Enemy must be dumbed down in order for it to work. Small scriptiing to improve tension can be good.
        If the enemy is easily killed, the tension will disappear.

    - experience of blockade running with loot, tension

        The end of the mission maximizes the cost of error, especially when no save-everywhere system is present. When you have some desirable entity captured in your cargo and you want to return to base with it/save progress, you become risk-averse. Tension can be created in this moment by forcing the stealth/interception encounter. Must be rare, majority of the times there must be no unusual threat, but when there is a threat - it must be real. Not overwhelming, but real.

    - experience of chasing and playing with an unknowing prey.

        It is fun to observe and stalk the prey. Anticipation of a kill must be built. It cannot be executed lightly, creeping in and observing is required to nurture obsession and focus. Limitations, such as no attack opportunity or legal restrictions must be conjured in order to prevent the player from executing the target immediately. When the prey notices you it will run, so the player must be told to get close and advised on the probability of the kill beforehand. Otherwise he will just shoot and be disappointed that he missed. Creeping must be taught. Target's mind state also must be explicit in the interaction, hints of "cluelessness" must be given. Additionally, tracker's experience can be fun: tracking an enemy in noisy/opaque environment by using wake-detection.

    - experience of ambushing an unknowing prey
        Continuation of the previous experience, but that is more passive: the player knows and plans beforehand, and does not stalk. Mines or lying in cover are some examples of an ambush. Surprise and fear of the target must be made explicit. If laying in cover by a group/with an ally, AI ally must be smart enough or commanded to actually stay hidden and wait for the first gun to fire. Concept of ambush also implies existance of environmental cover (for example isles), as well as shadowing techniques, like masquerading (which deserves a mission episode of it's own).

    - experience of dodging dangerous munitions, evasion and running away

        Itano circus. Near misses of the enemy are dramatic. Timely decoy application is stylish and skillful and therefore must be rewarded with improved efficiency. Rapid maneuvering also must be a valid tactic, hence hostile munitions must not be very agile. Moreso, the fact of the enemy attacking you must be visible/observable. In-combat noise chaos problem prevents this ATM because of passive sonar being too overwhelming of a screen. Some solution must be cheated in for incoming munitions to be telegraphed, or the sensor experience and early warning must be much improved. Currently, range towards enemy torpedo is very hard to estimate because it's loudness on the screen has almost no volume gradient and track width difference. Decoys must reward proper timing and their effectiveness easily demonstrated. Example would be hard-kill decoys that actually hunt the incoming torpedo. Current decoys are sensor-focused and must be used early. Decoy lifetime must be deterministic and obvious to the player on the tacmap.

    - experience of high-precision sniping from the edge of torpedo range

        Sniper's delight. Heavy hard-to-aim sniping weapons must be available, sniper style must be respected. Snipers are also efficient, so killing only the specified target should be more prestigious than killing everyone. Hitman score is a good example of perfectionism. Sniping munitions are also notorious to give no time for the target to react. Supercavitating lances, or simply heavyweight MIRV-torpedoes that are wire-guided to the target's location are just this. Important part is that the player outranges the enemy and is stealthy before the shot. Specialized submarines for such gameplay style may be necessary: large slow-to-reload tubes. Mission score should take firing range into account to have something to boast about. After-salvo evasion must also be stressful and involve 'running away from the overwhelming odds' experience. TMA puzzle must be precise enough for such an experience and sensor systems must not lose target's track in chaos after the shot, wich may be impossible in underwater ruleset of slow munitions.

    - experience of cooperating with a strong, obedient and helpful ally

        Escort mission that is actually fun must involve a useful, strong and intuitive ally that makes your life easier and can be used tactically. Let's focus on just a simple duet of submarines experience. Ally must respect player's ROE and stealth profile in order to not break his cover and must provide useful intel about the enemies he encounters. Ally needs a personality in order for the player to not want to lose him. His defensive skills must be superb, his probability of suicide should be very low. Mission must be structured is such a way that you
        need an ally to cover more ground and do some aggro + sidepunch combo, for example distracting an important target's escorts from it's vicinity in order for the player to snipe the main target itself. AI must clearly communicate it's current intentions, perhaps part of the AI debugging toolset must be part of the player's UI.

    - experience of overcoming hordes of dumber but nominally stronger enemies

        Non-sniper, chaingunner experience of dogfight with small numerous enemies. Such playstyle must be viable and involve very close maneuvering and rapid fire. Current sensor toolset will make this playstyle very hard due to TMA inertia and sensors being overwhelmed. Merging contact problem also is at odds with close fight. Perhaps "true sight" at very close distances must be introduced. Periodic active sonar ping and automatic reflection marking should also help. Enemy AI may need tuning on easy mode in order to prevent self-preservation behaviours, which make the brawling impossible.

    - experience of overcoming one extremely capable and strong enemy (boss)

        Hard AI with player-tier submarine is a must for a sense of challenge. Self-preservation is a must, as well as variery of it's arsenal and defensive measures. But it must be telegraphed and dramatized, otherwise the player will not discern the fight from other casual encounters. This requires either a mission-level lore dump/warning or some other plot tool.

    - experience of fine-tuning your vessel to the task at hand

        Tinkerers like tuning their vessel. Overcharging/overheat management and energy rebalancing is in-simulator level tuning that adds skill ceiling (but it must not be front-loaded in the first missions, but introduced as the mid-game tool or submarine module). Pre-mission vessel tuning that satisfies the "build" creator's mind, and alters the general playstyle/dominant strategy. Aesthetic tuning: color and stuff, but it may be optional. At the very least captain's portrait and name must be tunable.

    - experience of getting observably stronger, power creep

        Campaign must progress from simple submarine to an apex predator. New weapons and modules MUST be introduced, and they should vary in principle of their operation. Just increasing the power of torpedoes is a lame mechanic. Also, late campaign levels must clearly demonstrate that previous threats and enemies are now easy and can be dispatched rapidly.

    - experience of learning new, better tools

        Principle of operation of new modules, weapons and maybe even sensors must significantly differ from the previous tools. While new kinds of weapons still use the lauch tubes, their properties and tactics must differ. Examples of late-introduced tools can be hard-kill decoys, supercavitating torpedoes, overclocking, sound masquerading tools, wireless-guidance, wingman/escort, remote sensors (towed array, torpedo-like UAV).

    - experience of predicting the enemy, reading his mind

        Sniping or ambushing requires transperency and predictability from NPC patrols/fleets. Their mind must be readable, for example via some kind of comm sniffing or audible ques on waterfall screen. Alternatively, "true sight" may need to be introduced to show the enemy's intention. Right now such ques are tube sounds/equalization. Familiar concept of "Aggro" is expected by the player, and it is often hinted by visual and audio signalling.

    - experience of seeking a barely-visible enemy, search and reward

        Mission or secondary objectives can be dedicated to this experience. Reward can be both lore-wise and in credits/upgrades. Example mechanics would involve organizing each mission in some kind of resource-rich map that should be explored and completed, besides the main objective. Player may roleplay some kind of a mining/prospector submarine that competes for planet's resources. When the hidee is an enemy, perhaps some detective work or small puzzle must be introduced? For example, sound ques or slow stalking and pattern recognition from the player must reveal which of the contacts is the required one.

    - experience of planning ahead and executing the complex plan successfully

        Another dimension to ambushing, sniping and wingman-commanding tactics. May also be induced by Co-op gaming in campaign. Cross-referenced by torpedo guidance and advanced waypoint functionality. Baiting and mimicry tactics must work on AI.

    - experience of making an educated guess and being correct

        TMA and target classification/analysis puzzle essentially must be tested by combat or replay to know if the guess was correct. Perhaps some scripting tools can quicken this process and give earlier feedback about truth.

    - experience of having an emotional investment in the bigger picture: politics, for example.

        Common laws of drama and tragedy apply to the main campaign plot, but it is expensive. Perhaps extensive comic-style plot that does long character exposition can benefit the gameplay and attract the player, but it is hard to do this in just a simulator. Voice acting is also expected in modern games, but this is much harder, since even modern NN tools are sup-bar.

    - experience of strange perception

        Accentuate acoustic perception and impreciseness of knowledge, but gradually/slowly. Near the end of campaign most sensory hand-holding should be gone, and the acoustic/TMA framework must take the foreground. Being just the sensor operator/acoustic is a bit boring.

    - experience of delving deeper than you should, fear

        Europa-themed under-ice campaing idea is an example: you gradually descend towards the core of the planet, heat and pressure increases and should damage the player (slowly). Local wildlife and cryptide encounters should induce additional alienation and surprise, especially if unannounced. Visuals and VFX should accentuate the discoveries (see Sunless Skies).


● What experience do I want the player to have?
● What is essential to that experience?
● How can my game capture that essence?



2). Fun is pleasure with surprises.

● What will surprise players when they play my game?
● Does the story in my game have surprises? Do the game rules? Does the
artwork? The technology?
● Do your rules give players ways to surprise each other?
● Do your rules give players ways to surprise themselves?

TODO here! Important question, not much surprises atm in Dsubs.

Surprise is a crucial part of all entertainment — it is at the root of humor,
strategy, and problem solving.

Plot ideas:
    - Unexpected life on Europa.
    - Kraken-like apex predator. Not only it exists, it is sentient and communicating. It understands humor.
    - Going deeper first half of the campaign and then surviving the ascent. See "Orb run" from DCSS. Perhaps, your own side betrayed you?
    - There are pirates already on the Jupiter's moon.

Meta ideas:
    - Some mission, while advertised as singleplayer, in reality is PvP/multiplayer (may not be practical).
    - Final credits in form of an audio message, broadcasted to the water, containing thanks from the developers.

Scenario-level ideas:
    - Extremely-compenent minor enemy with very hard AI, unexpected boss.
    - AI recognizing player and juust running away screaming. "Yeah, not gonna deal with this". AI humor stuff.
    - Littered loot in obscure places. Unlockables, hidden on the maps.
    - Wingman betrays you.



3). "Play is manipulation that indulges curiosity."
Make the player curious in each mission/step.

● What questions does my game put into the player’s mind?
● What am I doing to make them care about these questions?
● What can I do to make them invent even more questions?

For example, a maze-finding videogame might have a time-limit goal such that
at each level, players are trying to answer the question: “Can I find my way
through this maze in 30 seconds?” A way to make them care more would be
to play interesting animations when they solve each maze, so players might
also ask the question: “I wonder what the next animation will be?”


- Curiosity about Europa's past and present. Geologics, life and aliens.
- Curiosity about new weapons and systems that the player can use.
- Curiosity about your classification and TMA skills, is my solution correct? TMA precision scoring and leaderboards.
- Curious sounds and visuals that entice investigation.
- Curiousity about what happenned to the SoS-signalling crew. First Kraken encounter?
- Landscape of each mission must be unusual in some way, themed perhaps? DCSS level variery and branching as inspiration. Salt sea, hot sea, iceberg field, crystal field, volcano streams/hot zones?



4). Lense of value

● What is valuable to the players in my game?
● How can I make it more valuable to them?
● What is the relationship between value in the game and the player’s
motivations?

Remember, the value of the items and score in the game is a direct reflection
of how much players care about succeeding in your game. By thinking about
what the players really care about and why, you can often get insights about
how your game can improve.


Speedy, stealthy, powerful submarines that can go deeper and deeper.
Weapons that work on the specified depth.
Safety is valuable, tools and information that helps to stay safe is valuable.



5).

● What problems does my game ask the player to solve?
● Are there hidden problems to solve that arise as part of gameplay?
● How can my game generate new problems so that players keep coming
back?

TODO: think about hidden problems.

Fighting for truth in the imprecise world of acoustics.
TMA problem. Hidden classification problem. Hidden merged contact problem. Hidden kill verification problem.
Attack vector problem. Hidden escape problem. Hidden mid-course weapon correction while defending problem.
Mission logistics and planning problem. Hidden fuel and energy problem.
New problems in this genre are usually done by new or "infinite" randomized scenarios.


6).

● What is my theme?
● Am I using every means possible to reinforce that theme?

A unifying theme is good — it focuses your design toward a single goal. But some
themes are better than others. The best themes are ones that resonate with players —
themes that touch players deeply


TODO: Dsubs is not currently fulfilling diving/sea experience and theme.
Dry and waterless, mathematical. Focus on the sound and combat with no atmosphere.
Sprincle some LOGH-style political drama?

Example theme:

Resource prospectors in harsh conditions under ice on foreign planet/moon (Europa)?
Theme of a pirate on his path to apex predator state?
Professional captain in the midst of war?
Diving into the dangerous unknown and competing for the spoils of exploration in the context of imprecise knowledge and strong opposing force.
Constant struggle to stay afloat, not boiled or frozen, alive and with enough fuel/air.
Mystery of an alternative life cradle.
Darkness, pressure, danger. One might say, these are dangerous waters, LMAO.


● What is it about my game that feels powerful and special?
● When I describe my game to people, what ideas get them really excited?
● If I had no constraints of any kind, what would this game be like?
● I have certain instincts about how this game should be. What is driving
those instincts?

Underwater mystery and combat.
No constraints dream: open-worldy MMO simulator where you go deeper and deeper. Something closer to multiplayer Sunless Skies with upgrades and such.



7).

● Does this game feel right?
● Will the intended audience like this game enough?
● Is this a well-designed game?
● Is this game novel enough?
● Will this game sell?
● Is it technically possible to build this game?
● Does this game meet our social and community goals?
● Do the playtesters enjoy this game enough?



8).

Story, Mechanics, Aesthetics, Technology.

TODO: after the design.



9).

● What could keep this game from being great?
● How can we stop that from happening?


TODO: after the design.


10).

● If my game had no goal, would it be fun at all? If not, how can I change
that?
● When people see my game, do they want to start interacting with it, even
before they know what to do? If not, how can I change that?


If there was no campaign, most players are repelled by sensor system and unintuitiveness of underwater combat. In order for them to stay, navigation and combat tactics must precede sensor system, everything must be faster and punchy/animated/sound good. Graphics must be gorgeous and catch an eye. Weapons and punchy explostions are expected, feeling of power when launching. Audio-visual feedback is a must for all actions. Tactile perception of operating a powerful vessel.
Alternative is a fun multiplayer competition and cooperation experience, hence the multi-station experience must be improved.
For the player to want to interact with the game, UI must be very attractive.


11).

He argues that you are in pre-production until you have finished two publishable
levels of your game, complete with all necessary features. In other words, until
you have two completely finished levels, you are still figuring out the fundamental
95
design of your game. Once you reach this magic point, you are now in production.
This means that you know enough about what your game really is that you can
safely schedule the rest of development. Cerny states that usually this point is gen-
erally reached when 30% of the necessary budget has been spent. So, if it costs you
$1 million to get to this point, it will probably cost you another $2.3 million to actu-
ally complete the game. This is a great rule of thumb, and realistically, this might be
the most accurate way to really plan the release date for a game. The problem with
it is that you won’t really know what the game will cost or when it will be complete
until you have already spent 30% of what it will take to get there.



12).
Ask yourself these questions about the people who will play your game
● In general, what do they like?
● What don’t they like? Why?
● What do they expect to see in a game?
● If I were in their place, what would I want to see in a game?
● What would they like or dislike about my game in particular?


Hardcore simmers:
    sensors and weapons, complex systems with high skill ceiling, engaging combat situtationa and plot, damage model, advanced lobby-based or infinite multiplayer, RP opportunities and realism flavor elements. Medium pace.
Arcady top-down tank/shooter fans, evolution of Bubble tanks flash game:
    upgrade system, amazing punchy combat, gorgeous audio and visuals, casual multiplayer with matchmakin, good game balance without dominant strategy. Fast pace.
Crew RPG fans:
    RPG elements, crew system, memorable characters, upgrade and tuning system, perk/skill system, damage and repair model, good enemy/ally system, RP opportunities in campaign. Slow to turn-based pace.

Pace obvously must be dynamic, as is already implemented via time acceleration. But it is not a good solution for multiplayer, hence the general game design must somehow compress these three ways to play in order for the multiplayer to be not-too-slow.



13).

● What does your game judge about the players?
● How does it communicate this judgment?
● Do players feel the judgment is fair?
● Do they care about the judgment?
● Does the judgment make them want to improve?


Negative judgement about bad classification/TMA is communicated very late: when the weapon misses or even in replay screen.
Bad defense and dodging is communicated by taking damage.
Inattentiveness to sensors and/or navigation is communicated by taking damage.
Lack of stealth and finesse is punished by danger and scenarion-level stealth points reduction.
Campaign must not kill the player with just one hit, at least most of the time.



14).

● Does my game have clear goals? If not, how can I fix that?
● Are the goals of the player the same goals I intended?
● Are there parts of the game that distract players to the point they forget
their goal? If so, can these distractions be reduced, or tied into the game
goals?
● Does my game provide a steady stream of not-too-easy, not-too-hard chal-
lenges, taking into account the fact that the player’s skills may be gradually
improving?
● Are the player’s skills improving at the rate I had hoped? If not, how can I
change that?


TODO: after the design.


15).

● What is the ultimate goal of my game?
● Is that goal clear to players?
● If there is a series of goals, do the players understand that?
● Are the different goals related to each other in a meaningful way?
● Are my goals concrete, achievable, and rewarding?
● Do I have a good balance of short- and long-term goals?
● Do players have a chance to decide on their own goals?


To become the best and strongest underwater captain on the Europa?
To get to the truth about this moon first?
To make the bank from the discoveries, get the first juciest loot, and retire filthy rich?
To build the coolest submarine on the Europa?



16).

● What skills does my game require from the player?
● Are there categories of skill that this game is missing?
● Which skills are dominant?
● Are these skills creating the experience I want?
● Are some players much better at these skills than others? Does this make
the game feel unfair?
● Can players improve their skills with practice?
● Does this game demand the right level of skill?


Spacial thinking and awareness.
Agressiveness.
Good hearing.
Mid-term planning of maneuvering.
Long-term resource planning.
Fast multi-tasking: offense and defense are sumultanious.
Threat prioritization.
Curiosity and attentiveness to surrounding sounds.
Precise point-and-click of mouse to issue commands rapidly.
Cooperation skills in multi-station.
Submarine build crafting??



17).

● What in my game is truly random? What parts just feel random?
● Does the randomness give the players positive feelings of excitement and
challenge, or does it give them negative feelings of hopelessness and lack
of control?
● Would changing my probability distribution curves improve my game?
● Do players have the opportunity to take interesting risks in the game?
● What is the relationship between chance and skill in my game? Are there
ways I can make random elements feel more like the exercise of a skill? Are
there ways I can make exercising skills feel more like risk-taking?


Some AI decisions currently, they must be made deterministic IMO.
Campaign/scenario level seed must be deterministic.
Weapon target prioritization decisions are random.
AI target detection decisions are a bit random.



18).

● What are the challenges in my game?
● Are they too easy, too hard, or just right?
● Can my challenges accommodate a wide variety of skill levels?
● How does the level of challenge increase as the player succeeds?
● Is there enough variety in the challenges?
● What is the maximum level of challenge in my game?


TODO: after the implementation.


19).

● What choices am I asking the player to make?
● Are they meaningful? How?
● Am I giving the player the right number of choices? Would more make
them feel more powerful? Would less make the game clearer?
● Are there any dominant strategies in my game?


TODO: after the design.



20).

Giving a player the choice to play it safe for a low reward, or to take a risk for
a big reward is a great way to make your game interesting and exciting. To use
the Lens of Triangularity, ask yourself these questions:
● Do I have triangularity now? If not, how can I get it?
● Is my attempt at triangularity balanced? That is, are the rewards commen-
surate with the risks?


- unlockables that will not be available without taking the risk
- reward agressiveness by making some enemies vulnerable to it
- victory screen point system rewards speed as well as precision
- risky platforms must have risky and fun weapons.



21).

● Are my players here to be judged (skill), or to take risks (chance)?
● Skill tends to be more serious than chance: Is my game serious or casual?
● Are parts of my game tedious? If so, will adding elements of chance enliven
them?
● Do parts of my game feel too random? If so, will replacing elements of
chance with elements of skill or strategy make the players feel more in
control?

Judged - skill.

TODO: after implementation.



22).

● Are my players looking for mindless action, or an intellectual challenge?
● Would adding more places that involve puzzle-solving in my game make it
more interesting?
● Are there places where the player can relax their brain, and just play the
game without thinking?
● Can I give the player a choice — either succeed by exercising a high level
of dexterity, or by finding a clever strategy that works with a minimum of
physical skill?
● If “1” means all physical, and “10” means all mental, what number would
my game get?
● This lens works particularly well when used in conjunction with Lens #16:
Lens of the Player.

Both, actually, arcady players like top-down mindless action more.
Agressive submarines must be played more like a top-down shooter than a TMA-perfectionist sniper. Dogfighting must be arcady. Long-range sniping must be simulatory.

TODO: after design.


23).

● What is it that determines the length of my gameplay activities?
● Are my players frustrated because the game ends too early? How can I
change that?
● Are my players bored because the game goes on for too long? How can I
change that?
● Setting a time limit can make gameplay more exciting. Is it a good idea for
my game?
● Would a hierarchy of time structures help my game? That is, several short
rounds that together comprise a larger round?

Hunger clock and limited supply of energy/health/weapons is a must.
Some scenarios should have a time limit.

TODO: after design and implementation.



24).

Everyone likes to be told they are doing a good job. Ask these questions to
determine if your game is giving out the right rewards in the right amounts at
the right times:
● What rewards is my game giving out now? Can it give out others as well?
● Are players excited when they get rewards in my game, or are they bored
by them? Why?
● Getting a reward you don’t understand is like getting no reward at all. Do
my players understand the rewards they are getting?
● Are the rewards my game gives out too regular? Can they be given out in a
more variable way?
● How are my rewards related to one another? Is there a way that they could
be better connected?
● How are my rewards building? Too fast, too slow, or just right?


- story continuation/cutscene
- more powerful toys and submarine tuning opportunities
- new ways to deal with previously-annoying situations and obstacles
- punchy audio-visual feedback for kills, maybe even voiced crew affirmations
- victory screen points and ranking



25).

One thing that psychological study has shown is that reward is always a better
tool for reinforcement than punishment. Whenever possible, if you need to encour-
age a player to do something, it is better to use a reward than a punishment, if you
can.

● What are the punishments in my game?
● Why am I punishing the players? What do I hope to achieve by it?
● Do my punishments seem fair to the players? Why or why not?
● Is there a way to turn these punishments into rewards and get the same, or
a better effect?
● Are my strong punishments balanced against commensurately strong rewards?


TODO: after the design.



26).

● What are the elements of my game?
● What are the purposes of each element? Count these up to give the element
an “elegance rating.”
● For elements with only one or two purposes, can some of these be com-
bined into each other, or removed altogether?
● For elements with several purposes, is it possible for them to take on even
more?


TODO: after the design.



27).

Only detail what you can do well. Players have rich, detailed imaginations. If
there is something you need to present that is of lower quality than your play-
ers will be able to imagine, don’t do it — let the imagination do the heavy lift-
ing!

Familiar worlds do not need much detail.

Use the binocular effect. When spectators bring binoculars to an opera or a
sporting event, they use them mostly at the beginning of the event, to get a close-
up view of the different players or performers. Once this close-up view has been
put into memory, the glasses can be set aside, for now the imagination goes to
work, filling in the close-ups on the tiny distant figures.

● What must the player understand to play my game?
● Can some element of imagination help them understand that better?
● What high-quality, realistic details can we provide in this game?
● What details would be low quality if we provided them? Can imagination
fill the gap instead?
● Can I give details that the imagination will be able to reuse again and again?
● What details I provide inspire imagination?
● What details I provide stifle imagination?

TODO: after the design.



28). Balancing...

The rule of doubling and halving suggests that when changing values to balance
your game, you will waste time by changing them by small amounts. Instead,
start by doubling or halving your values in the direction they need to go.

Plan to balance. You know you are going to have to balance your game. As you
are designing it, you might have a pretty good idea of what aspects of it you will
203
need to balance. Take advantage of that, and put in systems that make it easy to
change the values you expect to have to balance

Let the players do it. Every once in a while you will run in to a designer who
has this bright idea: “Let’s let the players balance the game..."


TODO: after the design.


29).

A puzzle is a game with a dominant strategy

● How will players know how to begin solving my puzzle, or playing my
game? Do I need to explain it, or is it self-evident?
● Does my puzzle or game act like something they have seen before? If it
does, how can I draw attention to that similarity. If it does not, how can I
make them understand how it does behave?
● Does my puzzle or game draw people in, and make them want to touch it
and manipulate it? If not, how I can I change it so that it does?

TMA is essentially a puzzle, and an unintuitive one. UX must be much improved.
Currently you need a video or a guide to even start it.

Target classification is another puzzle. There must be a dominant strategy for it then. No too similar sounds.



● What does it mean to make progress in my game or puzzle?
● Is there enough progress in my game? Is there a way I can add more interim
steps of progressive success?
● What progress is visible, and what progress is hidden? Can I find a way to
reveal what is hidden?

● Increase Difficulty Gradually



● Are there bottlenecks in my design where players are unable to proceed if
they cannot solve a particular challenge? If so, can I add parallel challenges
for a player to work on when this challenge stumps them?
● If parallel challenges are too similar, the parallelism offers little benefit. Are
my parallel challenges different enough from each other to give players the
benefit of variety?
● Can my parallel challenges be connected somehow? Is there a way that
making progress on one can make it easier to solve the others?


Puzzle Principle #9: Give the answer

TODO: not sure how to fix this, but currently active sonar is a shortcut and
the true "hardcore" answer can be made by shooting and getting a hit. Replays help with the rest, but they are essentially a cheat in campaigns.



30).

● What information does a player need to receive that isn’t obvious just by
looking at the game world?
● When does the player need this information? All the time? Only occasion-
ally? Only at the end of a level?
● How can this information be delivered to the player in a way that won’t
interfere with the player’s interactions with the game world?
● Are there elements of the game world that are easier to interact with using
a virtual interface (like a pop-up menu, for instance) than they are to inter-
act with directly?
● What kind of virtual interface is best suited to my physical interface? Pop-
up menus, for example, are a poor match for a gamepad controller.



31).

To call an interface “juicy” might seem kind of silly — although it is very com-
mon to hear an interface with very little feedback described as “dry.” Juicy
interfaces are fun the moment you pick them up. To maximize juiciness, ask
yourself these questions:
● Is my interface giving the player continuous feedback for their actions? If
not, why not?
● Is second-order motion created by the actions of the player? Is this motion
powerful and interesting?
● Juicy systems reward the player many ways at once. When I give the player
a reward, how many ways am I simultaneously rewarding them? Can I find
more ways?



32).

Interest curves.

● If I draw an interest curve of my experience, how is it generally shaped?
● Does it have a hook?
● Does it have gradually rising interest, punctuated by periods of rest?
● Is there a grand finale, more interesting than everything else?
● What changes would give me a better interest curve?
● Is there a fractal structure to my interest curve? Should there be?
● Do my intuitions about the interest curve match the observed interest of
the players? If I ask playtesters to draw an interest curve, what does it
look like?


Thought: sonar and sensor subsystem should be introduced later. First, simple
navigation and weaponry must capture the attention, and they must be fun.



33).

● What aspects of my game will capture the interest of a player immediately?
● Does my game let the player see or do something they have never seen or
done before?
● What base instincts does my game appeal to? Can it appeal to more of
them?
● What higher instincts does my game appeal to? Can it appeal to more of
those?
● Does dramatic change and anticipation of dramatic change happen in my
game? How can it be more dramatic?



34).

We love to experience things of great beauty. Use this lens to make your game
a joy forever by asking yourself these questions:
● What elements make up my game? How can each one can be more beautiful?
● Some things are not beautiful in themselves, but are beautiful in combi-
nation. How can the elements of my game be composed in a way that is
poetic and beautiful?
● What does beauty mean within the context of my game?


Beauty of visuals.
Beauty of sounds: Guns from world of warships as inspiration.



35).

One key indicator that someone is enjoying an experience is that they have
projected their imaginations into it. When they do this, their enjoyment of
the experience increases significantly, in a sort of virtuous circle. To examine
whether your game is well-suited to induce projection from your players, ask
yourself these questions:
● What is there in my game that players can relate to? What else can I add?
● What is there in my game that will capture a player’s imagination? What
else can I add?
● Are there places in the game that players have always wanted to visit?
● Does the player get to be a character they could imagine themselves to be?
● Are there other characters in the game that the players would be interested
to meet (or to spy on)?
● Do the players get to do things that they would like to do in real life, but
can’t?
● Is there an activity in the game that once a player starts doing, it is hard to
stop?




36).

A goal with no obstacles is not worth pursuing. Use this lens to make sure
your obstacles are ones that your players will want to overcome.
● What is the relationship between the main character and the goal? Why
does the character care about it?
● What are the obstacles between the character and the goal?
● Is there an antagonist who is behind the obstacles? What is the relationship
between the protagonist and the antagonist?
● Do the obstacles gradually increase in difficulty?
● Some say “The bigger the obstacle, the better the story.” Are your obstacles
big enough? Can they be bigger?
● Great stories often involve the protagonist transforming in order to over-
come the obstacle. How does your protagonist transform?




37).

Ask yourself these questions:
● Does my game really need a story? Why?
● Why will players be interested in this story?
281
● How does the story support the other parts of the tetrad (aesthetics, tech-
nology, gameplay)? Can it do a better job?
● How do the other parts of the tetrad support the story? Can they do a better
job?
● How can my story be better?


Unfortunately, yes. Initial focus on multiplayer proved the lack of people. Not enough
enthusiasts, wich means singleplayer must be the focus. And that needs at least a
nominal story.

Gameplay is too slow and nerdy to lack story unfortunately. Action genres will always
be more fun.



38).

The whole thing was only possible because we did something very unusual —
we made the characters in the game have two simultaneous goals. On one hand,
their goal is to engage the players in a challenging battle. On the other hand, their
goal is to lead the players to interesting places to keep the flow of the experience
optimal. I call this principle collusion, since the game characters are colluding with
the designer to make an experience that will be optimal for the players. It is an
interesting form of indirect control that joins methods of using goals, characters,
and visual design for a single unified effect.

Characters should fulfill their roles in the game world, but when possible, also
serve as the many minions of the game designer, working toward the design-
er’s ultimate aim, which is to ensure an engaging experience for the player.
To make sure your characters are living up to this responsibility, ask yourself
these questions:
● What do I want the player to experience?
● How can the characters help fulfill this experience, without compromising
their goals in the game world?



Make the campaign AI not only working for itself, but also script it to help the plot.



39).

To make sure your characters are doing everything your game needs them to
do, ask yourself these questions:
● What are the roles I need the characters to fill?
● What characters have I already imagined?
● Which characters map well to which roles?
● Can any characters fill more than one role?
● Do I need to change the characters to better fit the roles?
● Do I need any new characters?



40).

● How does each of my characters change throughout the game?
● How am I communicating those changes to the player? Can I communicate
them more clearly, or more strongly?
● Is there enough change?
● Are the changes surprising and interesting?
● Are the changes believable?



41).

A good game cannot contain properties that defeat the game’s very purpose.
To remove those contradictory qualities, ask yourself these questions:
● What is the purpose of my game?
● What are the purposes of each subsystem in my game?
● Is there anything at all in my game that contradicts these purposes?
● If so, how can I change that?



IDEA: "hunger clock" can be implemented by oxigen/energy depleting. Progress
must be sustained by refueling in new locations.



42).

Audio
feedback is much more visceral than visual feedback, and more easily simulates
touch.



43).

Community Tip #5: Let Players Express Themselves

This is quite hard in Dsubs. Custom sound emission and sub tuning comes to mind.
Open microphone?



44).

Community Tip #7: Force Players to Depend on Each Other

IDEA: Make some content for two+ campains or for very competent hot-seat pair?
Very hard multiplayer CO-OP missions?


45).

● Do I love my project? If not, how can I change that?
● Does everyone on the team love the project? If not, how can that be changed?



46).

Game Design Overview.
Detailed Design Document.
Story Overview

Technical Design Document
Pipeline Overview
System Limitations
Art Bible
Concept Art Overview

Story Bible
Script
Game Tutorial and Manual



47). IDEA: Feeedback form for players.

